---
title: 2.4. Run Fast, Pay Later - The Impact of Inaccurate Time Estimation
draft: false
tags:
  - google
  - project-management
  - blog
  - coursera
---
## Case Study: Kendra's Project

Kendra, a new project manager, was assigned a project with an almost impossible timeline. Due to her eagerness to succeed in her first big role, she chose not to inform management of her concerns. Instead, she rushed the planning phase, creating all planning documents without input from her team or other stakeholders, solely focused on meeting the deadline.

During the team meeting, team members immediately raised concerns about the timeline, citing insufficient time for task completion and reviews. Kendra acknowledged their concerns but instructed them to "work faster."

As the project progressed, it suffered from schedule delays, rework, previously unaccounted-for tasks, stressed team members, and concerned stakeholders. Ultimately, the project missed its deadline. A retrospective revealed valuable lessons for Kendra.

## Analysis of Missteps and Corrective Actions

### Escalating Concerns

- **Misstep**: Kendra sensed the timeline was problematic but kept silent, rushing instead of planning thoroughly.    
- **Corrective Action**: Kendra should have gathered information to support her concerns and escalated them to management.    

### Working Carefully

- **Misstep**: Kendra rushed through the planning process.    
- **Corrective Action**: Careful planning could have led to a more realistic project plan and identified time-saving opportunities. Thorough planning with the team could have identified problems and solutions in advance, such as:    
    - **Elimination of tasks**: Identifying and removing unnecessary work.        
    - **Increased team size**: Requesting additional resources early to mitigate schedule risks.        
    - **Streamlining activities**: Identifying tasks that could be done in parallel or in a non-sequential order.        

### Gathering Input from the Team

- **Misstep**: Kendra created planning documents without team or stakeholder input and failed to address team members' concerns about the timeline.    
- **Corrective Action**: Kendra should have involved team members, peers, and management in building and reviewing the project plan, especially given the challenging timeline. She also needed to act on the concerns of the team members responsible for completing the tasks.    

## Key Takeaway

It is crucial to be realistic when estimating project time and effort. Project managers should carefully evaluate potential risks and their impact on the work, discuss these challenges with team members, and not hesitate to escalate concerns to management. While optimism is a valuable trait for a project manager, excessive optimism can adversely affect projects, particularly in time estimation.